Github essentials
================

## I. Introduction (2 minutes)

### A. Brief overview of GitHub:

GitHub is a web-based platform that provides version control and
collaboration features using Git, a distributed version control system.
It enables developers to work together on projects, track changes to
code, and efficiently manage different versions of the project. GitHub
is widely used in the software development industry and is an essential
tool for collaborative projects and maintaining code quality.

### B. Introduce GitHub Desktop and JupyterHub GitHub widget:

GitHub Desktop is a graphical user interface (GUI) application that
simplifies working with Git and GitHub by providing a more visual and
intuitive way to manage repositories, branches, commits, and other Git
features. JupyterHub GitHub widget, on the other hand, is a built-in
widget that integrates Git and GitHub functionality directly into
Jupyter notebooks, allowing users to perform version control and
collaboration tasks within the Jupyter environment. Both tools help
streamline the process of working with GitHub and make it more
accessible to users with varying levels of experience with Git and
version control.

## II. GitHub Basics (4 minutes)

### A. Repository:

A repository, often abbreviated as “repo,” is the fundamental building
block of GitHub. It is a storage space for your project files, including
the code, documentation, and other related resources. Each repository
also contains the complete history of all changes made to the project
files, which is crucial for effective version control. Repositories can
be public, allowing anyone to access and contribute, or private,
restricting access to specific collaborators.

### B. Fork and Clone:

Forking and cloning are two essential operations for working with
repositories on GitHub. Forking creates a personal copy of someone
else’s repository under your GitHub account, enabling you to make
changes to the project without affecting the original repo. Cloning, on
the other hand, is the process of downloading a remote repository to
your local machine for offline development. In GitHub Desktop, you can
clone a repository by selecting “Clone a repository from the Internet”
and entering the repository URL. In JupyterHub GitHub widget, you can
clone a repository by entering the repo URL in the “Clone Repository”
section of the widget.

### C. Branches:

Branches are a critical aspect of Git version control, as they allow you
to create multiple parallel versions of your project within a single
repository. This is particularly useful when working on new features or
bug fixes, as it prevents changes from interfering with the main (or
“master”) branch until they are ready to be merged. Creating a new
branch in GitHub Desktop can be done by clicking the “Current Branch”
dropdown and selecting “New Branch.” In JupyterHub GitHub widget, you
can create a new branch by clicking the “New Branch” button in the
“Branches” section of the widget.

## III. Collaboration and Version Control (5 minutes)

### A. Commits:

Commits are snapshots of your project’s changes at a specific point in
time, serving as the fundamental building blocks of Git’s version
control system. Commits make it possible to track changes, revert to
previous versions, and collaborate with others. In GitHub Desktop, you
can make a commit by staging the changes you want to include, adding a
descriptive commit message, and clicking “Commit to \[branch_name\].” In
JupyterHub GitHub widget, you can create a commit by selecting the files
with changes, entering a commit message, and clicking the “Commit”
button.

### B. Pull Requests:

Pull requests are a collaboration feature on GitHub that enables
developers to propose changes to a repository, discuss those changes,
and ultimately merge them into the main branch. To create a pull
request, you must first push your changes to a branch on your fork of
the repository. Then, using either GitHub Desktop or JupyterHub GitHub
widget, you can navigate to the original repository, click the “Pull
Request” tab, and create a new pull request. After the pull request is
reviewed and approved, it can be merged into the main branch.

### C. Merging and Resolving Conflicts:

Merging is the process of combining changes from one branch into
another. This is typically done when a feature or bugfix has been
completed and is ready to be integrated into the main branch. Conflicts
can arise during the merging process if the same lines of code have been
modified in both branches. To resolve conflicts, you must manually
review the changes and decide which version to keep. In GitHub Desktop,
you can merge branches by selecting the target branch and choosing
“Merge into Current Branch.” Conflicts will be highlighted, and you can
edit the files to resolve them before committing the changes. In
JupyterHub GitHub widget, you can merge branches by selecting the target
branch in the “Branches” section and clicking the “Merge” button. If
conflicts occur, the widget will prompt you to resolve them before
completing the merge.

## IV. Additional Features (2 minutes)

### A. Issues and Project Management:

Issues are a powerful feature in GitHub that allows developers to track
and manage bugs, enhancements, and other tasks within a project. Issues
can be assigned to collaborators, labeled for easy organization, and
linked to specific commits or pull requests. They provide a centralized
location for discussing and addressing project-related concerns,
fostering collaboration and transparent communication among team
members. Using issues effectively can significantly improve the overall
management and organization of your projects.

### B. GitHub Pages:

GitHub Pages is a service offered by GitHub that allows you to host
static websites directly from a repository. By creating a new branch
named “gh-pages” in your repository and adding the necessary files
(HTML, CSS, JavaScript, etc.), GitHub will automatically build and
deploy your website to a publicly accessible URL. This is particularly
useful for showcasing project documentation, creating personal
portfolios, or hosting project demos. With GitHub Pages, you can take
advantage of the version control and collaboration features of GitHub
while easily sharing your work with others.

## V. Conclusion (2 minutes)

### A. Recap of the essentials of GitHub:

In this brief introduction, we have covered the essentials of GitHub,
including the basics of repositories, forking, cloning, branching,
commits, pull requests, merging, and resolving conflicts. We have also
discussed additional features like issues for project management and
GitHub Pages for hosting websites directly from a repository.

### B. Encourage further exploration and learning:

While this introduction provides a solid foundation for understanding
and using GitHub, there is still much more to learn and explore. As you
continue to use GitHub in your projects, you will discover new features
and workflows that can enhance your productivity and collaboration. We
encourage you to dive deeper into the platform and experiment with
different tools and techniques.

### C. Share resources for learning more about GitHub:

There are many resources available for learning more about GitHub and
expanding your skills. Some popular resources include GitHub Guides
(https://guides.github.com/), which offers a collection of tutorials and
best practices, the official GitHub documentation
(https://docs.github.com/), and various online tutorials and courses. By
engaging with these resources and participating in the GitHub community,
you can further develop your understanding of the platform and become a
more proficient user.
